              Parsing The IESNA LM-63 Photometric Data File
              ---------------------------------------------

                                    by

                           Ian Ashdown, P. Eng.
                  Vice President, Research & Development
                        byHeart Consultants Limited


Version:   1.00D

Date:      March 9, 1998

Synopsis:  The IESNA LM-63 photometric data file is an ASCII text file
           commonly used by North American lighting fixture manufacturers
           to distribute photometric information about their products.
           This document and its accompanying ANSI C source code listings
           demonstrates how to parse these files for use in lighting
           calculation and visualization software programs.

History:   Version 1.00A (95/08/15)

           - Initial release.

           Version 1.00B (95/09/04)

           - Minor bug fixes (memory deallocation).

           Version 1.00C (96/01/30)

           - Minor bug fixes (output formatting).
           - Added luminaire efficiency calculations.
           - Added zonal lumens calculations.
           - Added Coefficient of Utiliztion (CU) calculations.
           - Added CIE distribution type determination.
           - Revised Section 5, An IES Standard File Parser
           - Added Section 6, Coefficients of Utilization.
           - Revised Section 9, References.

           Version 1.00D (98/03/09)

           - Minor bug fix (file close)

1.  Introduction

In 1986, the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA)
published one of the first industry standards for the electronic
dissemination of photometric information for architectural lighting
fixtures (also known as "luminaires") and other light sources.

This standard was published as an IESNA Transaction called "IES LM-63-
1986: IES Recommended Standard File Format for Electronic Transfer of
Photometric Data." Despite its unwieldly title, it was quickly adopted by
lighting manufacturers and the developers of lighting calculation
software.

The standard was revised in 1991 to add "keywords", and again in 1995 to
clarify a number of ambiguities. (The title was also expanded to "IES
Standard File Format for Electronic Transfer of Photometric Data and
Related Information.") Both revisions are fully backward-compatible with
the previous versions.

One of the shortcomings of IES LM-63 is that (like most standards) it
does not offer a worked example of a parser for the IES Standard File
Format. Without such an example, software developers are often left
wondering whether they have interpreted the standard correctly.

This document and its accompanying ANSI C source code is an attempt to
rectify this situation. It is not an official implementation of an IES
Standard File parser (even though the author is a member of the IES
Computer Committee), and so cannot be guaranteed to be correct. However,
it has been thoroughly tested, and can be used as a model for developing
your own parser.

This document is *not* a substitute for IES LM-63-1991 or IES LM-63-1995. 
If you need to implement your own parser for a commercial project, you 
should obtain a copy of this IES publication. It contains details and 
discussions of numerous topics (such as the use of keywords) that are not 
covered here. If you are not familiar with illumination engineering 
principles and practices, you should also obtain a copy of the IES 
Lighting Handbook (Rea 1993), the official bible of the lighting 
industry. 

On the other hand, if you need to implement an IES Standard File parser
for a class project, thesis or other personal use ... well, the hard work
has been done for you.

2.  IES Standard File Format - Specification

The IES Standard File format as described in IES LM-63 is an ASCII text
file. There are three variants, based on LM-63-1986, LM-63-1991, and LM-
63-1995 respectively.

2.1     IES LM-63-1986

The file format specification for the LM-63-1986 variant is:

  Id  Description

  01  <label line 1>
  02  <label line 2>
  03  ...
  04  <label line n>
  05  TILT=<file-spec> or <INCLUDE> or <NONE>
  06  <lamp-to-luminaire geometry>
  07  <# of pairs of angles and multiplying factors>
  08  <angles>
  09  <multiplying factors>
  10  <# of lamps> <lumens per lamp> <candela multiplier>
      <# of vertical angles> <# of horizontal angles> <photometric type>
      <units type> <width> <length> <height>
  11  <ballast factor> <ballast-lamp photometric factor> <input watts>
  12  <vertical angles>
  13  <horizontal angles>
  14  <candela values for all vertical angles at first horizontal angle>
  15  <candela values for all vertical angles at second horizontal angle>
  16  ...
  17  <candela values for all vertical angles at nth horizontal angle>

A detailed description of each line is presented in Section 2, "IES
Standard File Format - Detailed Description."

2.2    IES LM-63-1991

The file format specification for the LM-63-1991 variant is:

  Id  Description

  00  IESNA91
  01  <Keyword [TEST]>
  02  <Keyword [MANUFAC]>
  03  ...
  04  <Keyword n>
  05  TILT=<file-spec> or <INCLUDE> or <NONE>
  06  <lamp-to-luminaire geometry>
  07  <# of pairs of angles and multiplying factors>
  08  <angles>
  09  <multiplying factors>
  10  <# of lamps> <lumens per lamp> <candela multiplier>
      <# of vertical angles> <# of horizontal angles> <photometric type>
      <units type> <width> <length> <height>
  11  <ballast factor> <ballast-lamp photometric factor> <input watts>
  12  <vertical angles>
  13  <horizontal angles>
  14  <candela values for all vertical angles at first horizontal angle>
  15  <candela values for all vertical angles at second horizontal angle>
  16  ...
  17  <candela values for all vertical angles at nth horizontal angle>

The changes between LM-63-1986 and LM-63-1991 are:

a) Identifier line 00 ("IESNA91") was added to distinguish the file from
   LM-63-1986 photometric data files.

b) The free-form label lines (identifiers 01 through 04) were replaced
   with lines that begin with user-defined keywords.

The interpretation of identifier lines 05 through 17 remain unchanged,
and is described in Section 3, "IES Standard File Format - Detailed
Description."

2.3    IES LM-63-1995

The file format specification for the LM-63-1995 variant is:

  Id  Description

  00  IESNA:LM-63-1995
  01  <Keyword 1>
  02  <Keyword 2>
  03  ...
  04  <Keyword n>
  05  TILT=<file-spec> or <INCLUDE> or <NONE>
  06  <lamp-to-luminaire geometry>
  07  <# of pairs of angles and multiplying factors>
  08  <angles>
  09  <multiplying factors>
  10  <# of lamps> <lumens per lamp> <candela multiplier>
      <# of vertical angles> <# of horizontal angles> <photometric type>
      <units type> <width> <length> <height>
  11  <ballast factor> <future use> <input watts>
  12  <vertical angles>
  13  <horizontal angles>
  14  <candela values for all vertical angles at first horizontal angle>
  15  <candela values for all vertical angles at second horizontal angle>
  16  ...
  17  <candela values for all vertical angles at nth horizontal angle>

The changes between LM-63-1991 and LM-63-1995 are:

a) Identifier line 00 was changed to "IESNA:LM-63-1995") to distinguish
   the file from LM-63-1986 and LM-63-1991 photometric data files and
   other (future) IESNA standard file formats.

b) The number of predefined keywords was expanded and new features (such
   as support for near-field photometric data) introduced via the keyword
   mechanism.

c) The <ballast-lamp photometric factor> was changed to <future use>.

The interpretation of identifier lines 05 through 17 remain unchanged,
and is described in Section 3, "IES Standard File Format - Detailed
Description."

3.  IES Standard File Format - Detailed Description

An IES LM-63 photometric data file is an ASCII text file with the
structure presented in Section 2, "IES Standard File Format -
Specification."

All lines shall be terminated with a <CR><LF> pair. (This is the text
file convention for MS-DOS programming environments; Unix-based programs
must read LM-63 photometric data files in binary mode and specifically
accept <CR><LF> pairs.)

An "identifier line" as presented in Section 2, "IES Standard File Format
- Specification," may be consist of one or more ASCII text lines in the
photometric data file. Multiple lines are typically present when the
space needed to represent the values in the identifier line exceeds the
allowable line length.

The maximum length of any label / keyword line (including the <CR><LF>
terminating pair) is 82 characters. The maximum length of any other line
(including the <CR><LF> terminating pair) is 132 characters. (Old-timers
will likely recognize the Fortran / Hollerith card heritage of the LM-63
file format.)

3.1     File Format Identifier (Identifier Line 00)

IES LM-63-1991 and LM-63-1995 photometric data files begin with a unique
file format identifier line, namely "IESNA91" or "IESNA:LM-63-1995".

IES LM-63-1986 does not have a file format identifier line.

3.2     Label Lines / Keywords (Identifier Lines 01 Through 04)

Label lines contain descriptive text about the luminaire, the lamp(s)
used, and other descriptive comments.

Keywords, which were introduced in LM-63-1991, require that each label
line begins with a defined IES keyword in square brackets. For example:

  [TEST] ABC1234 ABC Laboratories

The keywords [TEST] and [MANUFAC] are required in LM-63-1991, but not in
LM-63-1995. (Label lines are optional in LM-63-1986 and LM-63-1995.) The
following keywords are a suggested minimum for LM-63-1995:

  [TEST]        Test report number and laboratory
  [MANUFAC]     Luminaire manufacturer
  [LUMCAT]      Luminaire catalog number
  [LUMINAIRE]   Luminaire description
  [LAMPCAT]     Lamp catalog number
  [LAMP]        Lamp description

LM-63-1995 presents a list of predefined keywords that identify test-
related data, luminaire product information, luminaire characteristics,
and miscellaneous information. User-defined keywords are also permitted.

Details regarding the syntax of user-defined keywords are presented in
IES LM-63-1995.

The accompanying IES Standard File parser reads and stores, but does not
interpret, keyword lines.

3.3     TILT= (Identifier Line 05)

The lamp output may vary as a function of the luminaire tilt angle. If
so, then the photometric data file may provide photometric data
multipliers for various tilt angles.

The "TILT=" line uniquely delimits the end of label / keyword lines in
the photometric data file.

There are three variants of this line: "TILT=NONE", "TILT=INCLUDE", and
"TILT=<filename>".

3.3.1   TILT=NONE

The lamp output (presumably) does not vary as a function of the luminaire
tilt angle.

If TILT=NONE is present, the identifier lines:

  06  <lamp-to-luminaire geometry>
  07  <# of pairs of angles and multiplying factors>
  08  <angles>
  09  <multiplying factors>

are not present in the photometric data file.

3.3.2   TILT=INCLUDE

The lamp output varies as a function of the luminaire tilt angle.

If TILT=INCLUDE is present, the identifier lines:

  06  <lamp-to-luminaire geometry>
  07  <# of pairs of angles and multiplying factors>
  08  <angles>
  09  <multiplying factors>

are present in the photometric data file.

3.3.3   TILT=<filename>

The lamp output varies as a function of the luminaire tilt angle.

If TILT=<filename> is present (where "filename" is the name of a valid
TILT photometric data file), the identifier lines:

  06  <lamp-to-luminaire geometry>
  07  <# of pairs of angles and multiplying factors>
  08  <angles>
  09  <multiplying factors>

are present in the identified and separate TILT photometric data file.

3.4     Lamp-to-Luminaire Geometry (Identifier Line 06)

This integer value indicates the orientation of the lamp within the
luminaire as follows:

  Value Description

    1   Lamp base is either vertical base up or vertical base down when
        the luminaire is aimed straight down.
    2   Lamp is horizontal and remains horizontal when the luminaire is
        aimed straight down or rotated about the zero-degree horizontal
        plane.
    3   Lamp is horizontal when the luminaire is pointed straight down,
        but does not remains horizontal when the luminaire is rotated
        about the zero-degree horizontal plane.

The lamp-to-luminaire geometry line is absent if TILT=NONE.

3.5     Number of Pairs of TILT Angles and Multiplying Factors
        (Identifier Line 07)

This integer value indicates the total number of lamp tilt angles and
their corresponding candela multiplying factors. It is absent if
TILT=NONE.

3.6     TILT Angles (Identifier Line 08)

This line enumerates the (floating point) lamp tilt angles. It is absent
if TILT=NONE.

3.7     TILT Multiplying Factors (Identifier Line 09)

This line enumerates the (floating point) candela multiplying factors for
the corresponding lamp tilt angles. It is absent if TILT=NONE.

3.8     Number of Lamps (Identifier Line 10)

This integer value indicates the total number of lamps in the luminaire.

3.9     Lumens Per Lamp (Identifier Line 10)

This floating point value indicates the rated lumens per lamp on which
the photometric test was based. (This value is obtained from the lamp
manufacturer's published technical data for the lamp, and does not
represent the actual lumens emitted by the test lamp.)

If the luminaire has two or more lamps with different rated lumens per
lamp, this value represents the average lumens per lamp for the
luminaire.

In the (very rare) cases of absolute photometry, this value is -1.

3.10    Candela Multiplier (Identifier Line 10)

This floating point value indicates a multiplying factor that is to be
applied to all candela values in the photometric data file (identifier
lines 14 through 17).

3.11    Number of Vertical Angles (Identifier Line 10)

This integer value indicates the total number of vertical angles in the
photometric data (identifier lines 14 through 17).

3.12    Number of Horizontal Angles (Identifier Line 10)

This integer value indicates the total number of horizontal angles in the
photometric data (identifier lines 14 through 17).

3.13    Photometric Type (Identifier Line 10)

This integer value indicates the type of photometric web used for the
photometric measurements as follows:

  Value Description

    1   Type C photometry
    2   Type B photometry
    3   Type A photometry

Luminaires are photometered by locating the luminaire at the center of an
imaginary sphere and measuring the light intensity (candela) values at
grid points (the "photometric web') on the sphere's surface. The
orientation of the luminaire's axes relative to that of the sphere
determines the photometric type.

Type C photometry is normally used for architectural and roadway
luminaires. The polar axis of the photometric web coincides with the
vertical axis of the luminaire, and the 0-180 degree photometric plane
coincides with the luminaire's major axis (length).

Type B photometry is normally used for adjustable outdoor area and sports
lighting luminaires. The polar axis of the luminaire coincides with the
minor axis (width) of the luminaire, and the 0-180 degree photometric
plane coinicides with the luminaire's vertical axis.

Type A photometry is normally used for automotive headlights and signal
lights. The polar axis of the luminaire coincides with the major axis
(length) of the luminaire, and the 0-180 degree photometric plane
coinicides with the luminaire's vertical axis.

It is important to note that these photometric types are *not* clearly
defined in IES LM-63. All three versions refer the reader to the IES
Lighting Handbook for descriptions of Type A and Type B photometry, and
to CIE 27-1973 ("Photometry of Luminaires for Street Lighting") and CIE
43-1979 ("Photometry of Floodlights") for a description of Type C
photometry. It then says that "Type C is the form in common use in the
United States (although it was formerly referred to as Type A)."

This is in contrast to CIE Publication 102-1993, "Recommended File format
for Electronic Transfer of Luminaire Photometric Data," which clearly and
unambiguously defines three types of photometry: A (alpha), B (beta), and
C (gamma). The diagrams in CIE 102-1993 leave no doubt as to how their
photometric webs are oriented with respect to the luminaire.

Unfortunately, the IES LM-63 Type A photometry is equivalent to the CIE
102-1993 Type C photometry, and the IES LM-63 Type C photometry is
equivalent to the CIE 102-1993 Type A photometry.

See Section 7, "Diatribe," for a commentary on this situation.

3.14    Units Type (Identifier Line 10)

This integer value indicates the units used for the dimensions of the
luminous opening in the luminaire as follows:

  Value Description

    1   Feet
    2   Meters

3.15    Luminous Opening Dimensions (Identifier Line 10)

While the term "luminous opening" is somewhat ambiguous for many
architectural luminaires and other light sources, it is useful in
calculating average luminaire luminances and modeling the luminaires as
homogeneous area light sources.

3.15.1  Luminaire Width

This floating point value indicates the distance across the luminous
opening of the luminaire as measured along the 90-270 degree photometric
plane.

3.15.2  Luminaire Length

This floating point value indicates the distance across the luminous
opening of the luminaire as measured along the 0-180 degree photometric
plane.

3.15.3  Luminaire Height

This floating point value indicates the average height of the luminous
opening of the luminaire as measured along the vertical axis.

3.15.4  Nonrectangular Luminous Openings

The luminous opening is normally considered to be rectangular. However,
other predefined shapes can be modeled by specifying one or more of the
above dimensions as zero or negative floating point numbers as follows:

  Width  Length  Height  Description

     0      0       0    Point
     w      l       h    Rectangular (default)
    -d      0       0    Circular (where d = diameter of circle)
    -d      0      -d    Sphere (where d = diameter of circle)
    -d      0       h    Vertical cylinder (where d = diameter of
                         cylinder)
     0      l      -d    Horizontal cylinder oriented along luminaire
                         length.
     w      0      -d    Horizontal cylinder oriented along luminaire
                         width.
    -w      l       h    Ellipse oriented along luminaire length.
     w     -l       h    Ellipse oriented along luminaire width.
    -w      l      -h    Ellipsoid oriented along luminaire length.
     w     -l      -h    Ellipsoid oriented along luminaire width.

See IES LM-63-1995 for detailed descriptions and diagrams.

3.16    Ballast Factor (Identifier Line 11)

This floating point value indicates the ratio of the lamp lumens when
operated on a commercially-available ballast, to the rated lamp lumens as
measured by the lamp manufacturer using a standard (reference) ballast.

All candela values in the photometric data file (identifier lines 14
through 17) must be multiplied by the ballast factor before the candela
values are used in an application program.

3.17    Ballast-Lamp Photometric Factor / Future Use (Identifier Line 11)

In LM-63-1986 and LM-63-1991, this floating point value indicates the
ratio of the lamp lumen output using the given ballast and lamp type used
to generate a photometric report, to the lumen output of the same
luminaire with the ballast and lamp type used for photometric testing.

In LM-63-1995, it was recognized that most lighting manufacturers
incorporate the ballast-lamp photometric factor in the preceding ballast
factor and set the ballast-lamp photometric factor to unity.
Consequently, the ballast-lamp photometric factor was designated as being
for future use and the value set to unity to be compatible with previous
releases of LM-63.

All candela values in the photometric data file (identifier lines 14
through 17) must be multiplied by the ballast-lamp photometric factor
before the candela values are used in an application program.

3.18    Input Watts (Identifier Line 11)

This floating point value indicates the total power (measured in watts)
consumed by the luminaire, as measured during the photometric test.

(The input watts value is *not* adjusted by the ballast factor or
ballast-lamp photometric factor, even though the power consumption of a
luminaire may change if the measured candela values are modified.)

3.19    Vertical Angles (Identifier Line 12)

This line enumerates the (floating point) vertical angles.

For Type C photometry, the first vertical angle will be either 0 or 90
degrees, and the last vertical angle will be either 90 or 180 degrees.

For Type A or B photometry, the first vertical angle will be either -90
or 0 degrees, and the last vertical angle will be 90 degrees.

3.20    Horizontal Angles (Identifier Line 13)

This line enumerates the (floating point) horizontal angles.

For Type C photometry, the first value is (almost) always 0 degrees, and
the last value is one of the following:

  0     There is only one horizontal angle, implying that the luminaire
        is laterally symmetric in all photometric planes.
  90    The luminaire is assumed to be symmetric in each quadrant.
  180   The luminaire is assumed to be bilaterally symmetric about the
        0-180 degree photometric plane.
  360   The luminaire is assumed to exhibit no lateral symmetry. (NOTE:
        this is an error in the draft IES LM-63-1995 standard, because
        the 360-degree plane is coincident with the 0-degree plane. It
        should read "greater than 180 degrees and less than 360
        degrees").

(A luminaire that is bilaterally symmetric about the 90-270 degree
photometric plane will have a first value of 90 degrees and a last value
of 270 degrees.)

For Type A or B photometry where the luminaire is laterally symmetric
about a vertical reference plane, the first horizontal angle will be 0
degrees, and the last horizontal angle will be 90 degrees.

For Type A or B photometry where the luminaire is not laterally
symmetric about a vertical reference plane, the first horizontal angle
will be -90 degrees, and the last horizontal angle will be 90 degrees.

3.21    Candela Values (Identifier Lines 14 Through 17)

These lines enumerate the (floating point) candela values. There is one
line for each corresponding horizontal angle, and one candela value for
each corresponding vertical angle.

4.  IES Standard File Example

The following is an example of an IES LM-63-1995 photometric data file
(adapted from IES LM-63-1995):

  IESNA:LM-63-1995
  [TEST] ABC1234 ABC Laboratories
  [MANUFAC] Aardvark Lighting Inc.
  [LUMCAT] SKYVIEW 123-XYZ-abs-400
  [LUMINAIRE] Wide beam flood to be used without tilt
  [LAMPCAT] MH-400-CLEAR
  [LAMP] Metal Halide 400 watt
  [BALLASTCAT] Global 16G6031-17R
  [BALLAST] 400W 277V MH
  [MAINTCAT] 4
  [OTHER] This luminaire is useful as an indirect flood
  [MORE] and to reduce light pollution in down light
  [MORE] applications.
  [SEARCH] POLLUTION SPORTS INDIRECT
  [BLOCK]
  [LUMCAT] TENNISVIEW 123-XYZ-abc-400
  [LUMINAIRE] Wide beam flood for indirect applications.
  [ENDBLOCK]
  TILT=INCLUDE
  1
  13
  0 15 30 45 60 75 90 105 120 135 150 165 180
  1.0 .95 .94 .90 .88 .87 .98 .87 .88 .90 .94 .95 1.0
  1 50000 1 5 3 1 1 .5 .6 0
  1.0 1.0 495
  0 22.5 45 67.5 90
  0 45 90
  10000 50000 25000 10000 5000
  10000 35000 16000 8000 3000
  10000 20000 10000 5000 1000

5.  An IES Standard File Parser

The IES Standard File parser accompanying this document consists of three
ANSI C source code files and two sample IES LM-63-1995 photometric data
files.

a)  IESNA.C         IES LM-63 photometric data file parser functions

b)  IESNA.H         IES LM-63 photometric data file parser include file

c)  IES_READ.C      Example IES LM-63 photometric data file parser
                    program

d)  TEST.IES        Example photometric data file from IES LM-63-1995.

e)  11621PN.3S      Example photometric data file (courtesy Ledalite
                    Architectural Products, Inc.)

The C source is entirely ANSI C-compliant, and compiles without
modification under MS-DOS and UNIX-based ANSI C compilers. No compiler-
specific function calls or macros are employed.

The public interface to the IESNA module consists of only three 
functions: 

a)  IE_ReadFile    Reads an IES LM-63 photometric data file into an
                   IE_DATA photometric data structure.

b)  IE_Flush       Releases any memory that was dynamically allocated
                   to the IE_DATA photometric data structure when an
                   IES LM-63 photometric data file was previously read.

c)  IE_CalcData    Calculates the luminaire efficiency, zonal lumens,
                   and Coefficients of Utilization (CU) from the
                   photometric data in accordance with IES LM-57,
                   "IES Recommended Procedure for Calculating
                   Coefficients of Utilization, Wall and Ceiling Cavity
                   Exitance." (See Section 6, Coefficients of
                   Utilization, for further details.) Also determines
                   the CIE distribution type for the luminaire.

An example program demonstrating the use of these three functions is
presented in IES_READ.C. The program IES_READ reads a user-specified IES
LM-63 photometric data file (any version) and displays the photometric
data.

To run IES_READ, compile the program and enter the following on the
command line:

  IES_READ test.ies

or

  IES_READ 111621pn.3s

The Coefficients of Utilization, luminaire efficiency, zonal lumens
summary, and CIE distribution type will only be calculated for the
second example; TEST.IES does not contain sufficient photometric data
to accurately calculate this information.

The IE_DATA photometric data structure contains all of the information
contained in the photometric data file. However, it is not immediately
useful in an application program. The candela values represent the
measurements taken in the photometric laboratory. The actual candela
values to be used in an application program must be calculated as:

  actual_candela_value = measured_candela _value *
                         candela_multiplier *
                         ballast_factor *
                         ballast-lamp_photometric_factor

(where the ballast-lamp photometric factor is always 1.0 for LM-63-1995
photometric data files).

If the photometric data file contains lamp tilt data, the tilt angle of
the luminaire must be determined and the appropriate tilt angle
multiplier applied.

You may also have to extrapolate the candela values array if luminaire
symmetry is implied (see Section 3.20, "Horizontal Angles (Identifier
Line 13)"). For example, a range of horizontal angles from 0 to 90
degrees implies that the luminaire is symmetric in each quadrant. It is
up the the user, however, to interpret this information in a physically
meaningful manner. (A wall-mounted luminaire is *not* going to be
symmetric in all four quadrants, regardless of what the photometric data
implies!)

Finally, you will need to interpolate candela values for vertical and 
horizontal angles not represented in the photometric data. Most LM-63 
photometric data files for architectural luminaires provide candela 
values at 5 degrees vertical intervals and 22.5 degree horizontal 
intervals. (Vertical angle intervals of 2.5 degrees and 10 degrees are 
occasionally provided.) 

While there are numerous interpolation algorithms that can be applied to
the data, it must be remembered that most luminaires are very coarsely
sampled (22.5 degree intervals) in the horizontal plane. While you could
use bicubic spline interpolation or similar techniques (where the
luminaire's photometric distribution can be envisioned as a three-
dimensional surface), simple bilinear interpolation between the nearest
measurement angles is probably adequate for all practical applications.

IES LM-63-1995 expands the use of keywords to provide additional
photometric data and related information. These include near-field
(application distance) photometric test distances, luminaire manintenance
category, photometric distribution type, and flashed areas. At this time,
however, none of the commercially-available  photometric data files make
use of these keywords.

The IE_CALC data structure contains additional photometric information 
that was calculated by calling IE_CalcData. See the following Section 6, 
Coefficients of Utilization, for further details. 

6.  Coefficients of Utilization

The Coefficient of Utilization (CU) of a luminaire is, to quote the IES
Lighting Handbook (Rea 1993), "the ratio of the luminous flux (lumens)
reaching a specified area directly from a floodlight or projector to the
total beam luminous flux (lumens)."

Depsite the reference to floodlights and projectors, the Coefficient of
Utilization of a luminaire is an essential value when performing average
illuminance calculations using the Lumen Method (see Chapter 9, "Lighting
Calculations," of the IES Lighting Handbook). Step 5 of this method 
(which is a simplified form of radiosity calculations) reads: "Obtain
Coefficient of Utilization (CU) from Manufacturer's Data."

The IESNA LM-63 photometric data file does not contain this information.
However, if the data file contains candela measurements at vertical angle
intervals of 5.0 degrees, the CU values can be calculated from these 
measurements.

The mathematics are somewhat hoary. If you are interested in the details,
you should consult IES LM-57, "IES Recommended Procedures for Calculating
Coefficients of Utilization, Wall and Ceiling Cavity Exitance." 
Otherwise, IES_READ presents a range of CU values in a table that is 
identical to that provided by most luminaire manufacturers.

(The Lumen Method is based on radiative transfer theory, and is
essentially a simple radiosity method that was designed for quick paper-
and-pencil calculations. It is used almost exclusively for interior
lighting design, and usually assumes that there are no partitions or 
furniture in the room.)

7.  Diatribe

  Standards are good. Standards are great! Isn't it wonderful that we
  have so many standards to choose from?
                                                        Anonymous

The CIE (Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage, or International
Commission on Illumination) is the European-based international
counterpart of the IESNA. In 1993, it released a technical report (CIE
Publication 102) called "Recommended File Format for Electronic Transfer
of Luminaire Photometric Data." Their file format is similar in content
and style to the IES LM-63 format, but there are many differences that
render the two formats incompatible.

With today's increasingly global economy, it would be reasonable to
expect that there would be one international standard for the
dissemination of photometric data. Unfortunately, this is not the case.
There is no formal communication between the IES Computer Committee
(which is responsible for LM-63) and the CIE Technical Committee 4-16,
"The Transfer of Photometric Data for Exterior Lighting" (which is
responsible for CIE 102). Without this, there is little hope that the two
standards will be merged into one global standard.

Even worse is the fact that other standards continue to be used. For
example, the Danish lighting industry reportedly uses the LTLI Luminaire
Photometric File Format that was developed in the 1970s by the Danish
Illuminating Laboratory (Lystenknisk Laboratorium), now known as Light
and Optics (Lys & Optik). In Japan, each major lighting manufacturer
apparently still uses their own proprietary file format.

This situation is a nuisance for lighting manufacturers, who must provide
multiple versions of their photometric data if they market their
products outside of North America or Europe. It is more frustrating for
software developers, who must develop and support file parsers for a
variety of international, national and proprietary "standards."

Pity, however, the poor lighting designer who has to deal with
international projects. A major architectural project in Beijing! Who are
the local luminaire manufacturers and suppliers? What photometric data
file formats do they use? What lighting calculation and visualization
software programs support them?

The message -- which must be stated loud and clear -- is this: we need
one universal standard for the electronic dissemination of photometric
data and related information for light sources.

If you agree, then take action. Send a letter to the respective chairs of
the IES Computer Committee and the CIE Technical Committee 4-16, care of
the addresses listed under Section 9, "Notes," below. Tell them what the
word "standard" means in terms of today's global economy.

Thank you.

8.  References

    CIE. 1993. "CIE Technical Report: Recommended File Format for
    Electronic Transfer of Luminaire Photometric Data," CIE Publication
    102-1993. ISBN 3-900-734-40-2.

    IESNA. 1982. "IES Recommended Procedures for Calculating
    Coefficients of Utilization, Wall and Ceiling Cavity Exitance,"
    IES Publication LM-57. New York, NY: Illuminating Engineering
    Society of North America.

    IESNA. 1986. "IES Recommended Standard File Format for Electronic
    Transfer of Photometric Data," IES Publication LM-63-1986. New York,
    NY: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.

    IESNA. 1991. "IES Recommended Standard File Format for Electronic
    Transfer of Photometric Data and Related Information," IES
    Publication LM-63-1991. New York, NY: Illuminating Engineering
    Society of North America.

    IESNA. 1995. "IES Recommended Standard File Format for Electronic
    Transfer of Photometric Data and Related Information," IES
    Publication LM-63-1995. New York, NY: Illuminating Engineering 
    Society of North America. 

    Rea, M., Ed. 1993. Lighting Handbook, Eighth Edition, Reference &
    Application. New York, NY: Illuminating Engineering Society of North
    America.

9.  Notes

a)  IESNA publications are available from:

      Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
      120 Wall Street, 17th Floor
      New York, NY 10005

      Tel. (212) 248-5000

b)  CIE publications are available in the United States from:

      Secretariat of the USNC/CIE
      National Institute of Standards and Technology
      Gaithersburg, MD 20899

    and in Canada from:

      Canadian National Committee of the CIE
      c/o Institute for National Measurement Standards
      National Research Council
      Ottawa, Ontario

c)  A large set of IES LM-63-1986 and LM-63-1991 photometric data files
    for architectural (fluorescent lamp) luminaires is available from:

      http://www.ledalite.com

10. Conclusions

The IES Standard File format as specified in IES LM-63-1995 is
necessarily wide-ranging and complicated. This being its first release,
it is unlikely that this document and its accompanying source code are
entirely correct.

In the event of any differences between this document or source code and
LM-63, the final arbiter is of course IES LM-63-1995. If you have any
questions regarding LM-63, or (more important) find any discrepancies
between this document and LM-63-1995, please contact the author:

  Ian Ashdown
  Vice President, Research & Development
  byHeart Consultants Limited
  620 Ballantree Road
  West Vancouver, B.C.
  Canada V7S 1W3

  Tel.    (604) 922-6148
  Fax.    (604) 987-7621
  e-mail: byheart@acm.org

The IESNA file parser accompanying this document is not exactly a drag-
'n'-drop solution to incorporating IES LM-63 photometry in your
applications. It would be difficult to design a module that anticipates
the many possible uses of real-world photometric data and interfaces
cleanly with the many three-dimensional CAD frameworks currently in
vogue.

On the other hand, implementing a robust IES LM-63 file parser is a non-
trivial task. The accompanying C source code at least offers a solution
to this problem. We hope you find it useful.
